it has always seemed very strange to me
that nobody wants to evaluate or
question
our system of education in terms of
justice
and injustice
many people want to become medical
doctors
some are going to have that opportunity
others are not
isn't there an inevitable question of or
an inevitable
problem of justice and injustice
just in the distribution of that
opportunity
the access to that opportunity right
how the winners and losers are chosen
and the example of becoming a medical
doctor
rests on relatively easily verified
facts and scores when you take a look at
the way
cambridge university or oxford
university in england
the way they choose who will get the
opportunity to write
a phd in anthropology
anthropology a science where you know
there is no objective measure of who has
the talent
to do this who's going to get a phd or a
master's degree in
dance or art or literature or poetry
whose poetry deserves to be published
sure but who deserves to
get advancement in the education system
because of their opinions
about someone else's poetry where there
are no objective criteria and in
in my own experience even in fields
where there is something as
tangible and verifiable as language
ability like
can you read chinese or not in order to
get ahead in this program chinese
the actual question of who is selected
to be a winner and who is a loser
is not based on verifiable factually
real
questions of ability at all it's not
even based on things like how many
peer-reviewed publications you've
published not not at all
at cambridge in oxford and england
very often the selection of who is a
winner and who is
a loser is based on the student and the
supervisor the senior professor having a
nice little chat
you know meeting up and chatting with
one another
since early childhood it always seemed
to me very strange that nobody wanted to
question
the lottery nobody wanted to question
gambling in terms of justice and
injustice
now boxing is a somewhat morally
disturbing
sport because if you want to win at
boxing you want someone else to lose
your own victory entails someone else
being badly hurt
and injured morally
we all seem to be comfortable with this
as long as it's between
consenting adults who understand the
risks there's some other kinds of terms
and conditions
for who is and who isn't allowed to go
into a boxing match but you're risking
brain damage you're risking serious
injury
in some cases death once in a while
people do actually die
uh in the boxing ring and strangely
everyone is perfectly comfortable with
this in the 21st century
if you walk up to a roulette table
and you want to win it means you want
everyone else
to lose and not by any
virtue they may have not by any virtue
you may have and that they lack not
because you're better than them
or smarter than them you want to walk up
to that roulette table
and win just because you're you and you
want everyone else
at that table to lose their money
because if the wheel spins and it's your
number that wins that means there's a
whole lot of other people
that lose there's a it's much more
surreal
than a boxing match where at least we
have the consoling delusion
that hard work or virtue decides
who is the winner and who is the loser
now
on formal lottery gambling
so people buying lottery tickets well
those are scratch and win tickets
where you buy the number and then here
on the radio what's a
winning number this principle has been
scaled up
to such an extent that it resembles
taxation right on a massive scale
thousands of people hundreds of
thousands of people
buy a ticket knowing
that they will lose but somebody will
win so this is like a roulette table
where the number is going to spin and
the vast majority of people
are going to lose but somebody somewhere
is going to win not based on any virtue
they have that you lack completely
arbitrarily
and people are happy to pay this tax
people are perfectly satisfied they have
no sense of injustice
knowing that many thousands of people or
even millions of people
are being taxed unjustly if you want
having their money
taken away from them or becoming a
little bit poorer
so that somebody somewhere
arbitrarily will have this positive
opportunity
whether it's that they win ten thousand
dollars or they win
a million dollars right people accept
this
i think there is a very similar logic
at a deep level culturally in people
accepting
that somebody somewhere
is going to get the chance to learn
sanskrit
somebody somewhere is going to get the
chance to learn
ancient greek somebody somewhere is
going to get the chance to become an
x-ray technician
and they don't really care who it is
as long as it is in this way arbitrary
and indifferent and all of us are paying
for it
whether you live in canada or denmark or
england or even the united states of
america in fact
we are all buying lottery tickets to
support this order we are all paying
taxes
look at the percentage even in the
united states of america where people
pay a lot of money in tuition
look at how many millions of dollars the
government is giving to support those
same universities
that charge those high rates of tuition
right it's it's shocking but
there's a lot of money being poured in
from the taxpayers also
throughout western europe throughout the
western world right
we're all paying for somebody
to win the lottery with no questions
asked
with no standard no accountability no
transparency
as to who should get that opportunity
who merits it
who deserves it because we feel
comfortable
that somebody will win the lottery
now there are there are problems here
when i was a kid there were two types
of professors in the whole sphere
of politics history
and economics i wish i had one word for
that range of subjects
there were two types of professors
there were die hard marxists
who found one excuse after another to
say something positive about joseph
stalin and mao zedong
and to teach you their crazy
superstitious reinterpretation of the
world history
in terms of karl marx's dialectical
materialism you know
they were in big numbers in academia
when i was a kid
right and then there would be these more
skeptical anti-communist
historical revisionists if you want who
are looking
at the same history in the same politics
and saying well
where did this all go wrong people who
were willing to admit
communism in russia was a disaster
people were going to admit
communism in china was a disaster and a
lot of ev a lot of those people in
academia when i was a kid
a lot of them had been communists when
they were younger they had been marxists
but over time they got cynical they
developed a more
nuanced perspective i'm not joking i did
i'm from canada
all right where i didn't have any
right-wing
christian conservative professors period
they did not exist
in the social media i was i was born
into um
so this was kind of the political range
there were people committed to making
excuses
for marxism and communism and there were
people
willing to ask hard questions about it
what if you have a department in a
university
or you have a field of study where a
hundred percent of the people
are the true believers 100 percent of
the people are the crazy
communists or the marxists what happens
in that
field with ideologies
that are much less obvious to outsiders
than communism this happens in one field
after another
again and again right like oh our whole
department
are just people who worship the
intellectual legacy of
foucault or marcusa or our whole
department is just people
who worship noam chomsky and you have a
pro-chomsky linguistics department
where it's linguistics mixed with
marxism and communism by the way
this kind of far-left ideology or you
know
women's studies could be this wonderful
vibrant field of research and education
take a look at what the ideology is that
defines a particular department of
women's studies
right and who is being filtered out who
is being
excluded and who is being recruited into
that department on a on a like-minded
basis right very briefly
you can imagine most departments
most not all that study christianity
they will only include they will only
recruit
christian students christian professors
and you know
sessional lecturers teaching assistants
uh
m.a students speeches they will only
recruit and reward people
who share the particular christian
ideology
of that department right christians
christians are actually maybe especially
open-minded you'd be surprised
christians just because of the nature of
their religion
they actually may be more open to
inviting in a sinner
they may you know a protestant may be
more open to including
a catholic or a jew in their department
than any other religion you might think
it's the most narrow-minded religion but
in academia it's not
right but you know what about someone
who is
an overt atheist nihilist
who wants to look in a hard-hitting way
christianity and slavery where they want
to do research that is just completely
condemning
the history of the church the
institution of celebration something
like you know
what what if uh some specific area of
research this is this is real
what if you have someone who wants to
research on catholic priests
who left france to go to cambodia
and vietnam and got huge numbers of
women pregnant
and operated orphanages where they were
buying
female slaves this guy i've read
accounts of this right you know like
the role of liberating slaves that end
up becoming the sexual pawns
of christian missionaries okay this is
really embarrassing
is that research going to be so are they
going to hold a conference on that are
they going to
are they going to teach that in their
classes are they going to incorporate
that into the real
something really hard for that field to
deal with and if you guys if you're new
to the channel you don't know this about
me i was a scholar of buddhism
for many years i was asking questions
that tough
that hard to deal with within buddhist
studies
okay can the people who work in buddhist
actually recruit actually reward
actually educate actually give
credentials to
someone who asks tough questions that
really challenge that field including by
the way
questions about slavery questions about
sex questions about corruption
but even the questions i was asking
about the history of meditation
mistranslation of meditation into
english what the ancient texts say and
what matters
those were deeply disturbing questions
to people in positions of authority
people in positions of power
in academia and the answer is no they
can't
deal with it so what happens
one generation after another in this
lottery
where there is absolutely no
transparency there's
absolutely no meritocracy in the sense
of having
objectively verifiable
real criteria whereby we choose
you get this opportunity and you don't
now one one of the telltale aspects
from my perspective is just how high the
rate of attrition is in elite university
programs that when you give people these
opportunities
a remarkably large number of them
once they go there once they start
spending the money and spend time once
they figure out
what the nature of the opportunity is a
remarkably high number of them
do drop out so i'll stick with buddhist
studies
just for the sake of it um i knew i knew
i could use specific faces and specific
names this a scenario i saw play out
again and again is
um a young man who is a hippie
has been into marijuana and lsd
and maybe has done some drug tourism to
thailand
you know and feels he's an open-minded
person
goes and approaches the professor and
they have a very nice charming chat
where he's not in any way offensive to
the professor or challenging
the professor's authority and they're
they're taken on as a
m.a student or one of these package
programs where they're doing an m.a
going on to a phd or something on this
basis
of seeming like a nice young chap
probably this person was born rich
and again they they went on vacation in
india they went on vacation in thailand
they think they're into this you know
groovy buddhism
and then once they're given this
opportunity guess what they find out
what the hard work
of the field is it's the type of hard
work i actually did
and i demonstrated that i that i could
do but like
guess what this field is about sitting
with a manuscript
and you know like the language work the
translation work even the social science
research going and interviewing people
in prison
about prison conditions and buddhist
chaplains going there's all kinds of
social
important social science research to do
related to buddhism
what hey what's going on with buddhism
and hiv aids do you ever think about
that you know like i mean there are
really interesting questions
for the right people to handle those are
not the people you're recruiting
a very large percentage of the people
given this
opportunity right they burn out they
flake out
they drop out and the greatest tragedy
of all is
the ones who don't go on to become
completely useless professors
who spend their time trying to recruit
and reward
the same sort of completely useless
student
that they were before communists
in the department of history marxists
in the department of women's studies
same
pattern and on a massive scale
right what we get through this
lottery-like
education system is the apotheosis of
mediocrity
we get whole institutions where people
have
no ambition there is no pursuit of
excellence
people spend their whole careers just
trying to conceal their ignorance
conceal their mediocrity and recruit
like-minded people
who will affirm their own high opinion
of themselves
you get a kind of expertise that is with
the passage of time
increasingly detached from the real
world outcomes
that the discipline was supposed to
accomplish in the first place
anthropology is a dramatic example of
this
right so let's just talk about british
anthropology to specify that french
anthropology is a little bit different
german anthropology is a little bit
different
but like anthropology in the
english-speaking world
was founded on the example of
you know a brilliant young man going out
to live with a remote
tribal group in africa or papua new
guinea
where the language had barely been
documented you know
like there may be no text but there
would be no dictionary for this language
and
laboring for years to become fluent in
that language
laboring for years to gain the trust of
the medicine man or the chief in that
society
and to document and explain to the
western world
what their culture is what their
religion is how their society
works right this is this kind of heroic
vision of going out and you know working
at the frontiers
of what is known or knowable in the
living cultures
of the world and and documenting it
right so um there's a guy named boaz
b-o-a-z b-o-a-z if you're if you're
american
and you know this guy presided over
similar heroic attempts to document the
culture and the legends
of canada's indigenous people the tribal
people such as they still
existed they weren't they weren't really
tribal anymore but you know
uh to write down their legends their
literature their stories
and their language which begins with
taking white people
and immersing them in that culture and
having them really practice the language
up to this high level of ability where
you can do that so just just
even with a modern language is this in
the real world
think about how tough that would be for
you to do right now in
an easy language like russian or chinese
and i mean
easy in the sense of there is a
dictionary there is an app
on your phone there are a lot of
resources okay now think about it with a
language where none of those
resources exist where you're really the
first person that was those definition
of of what anthropology
was supposed to be about and now look at
the reality of what anthropology
actually
is in academia today and what the actual
abilities are of the people who are
produced
by master's degree programs and phd
programs
what is it they're capable of i mean
long story short the first thing to
disappear
was the language aspect because it's
very expensive to teach
and hard to value are you actually
producing people with these high levels
of
language ability but you're going to see
people i can i can give you a ton of
real world examples it's a woman who did
her thesis
on the fashion industry in milan
going and interviewing people in the in
the fashion industry
there's a woman who did a like a
motorcycle vacation
in vietnam and didn't even learn the
language there are people
i mean it's really it's really like
tourism as an academic discipline now
right and people just write about their
own feelings you know they go they go to
some exotic foreign country and write a
memoir
of what they did and that's a phd in
anthropology and they going to produce
other people
with phds anthropology the downward
spiral is
dramatic now look i think the
fundamental reason
why people are comfortable with the
injustice of the lottery
is the sense that it doesn't matter most
likely in the country where you live
they have these scratch tickets and
let's say the scratch ticket so this is
a piece of paper
and you scratch off with a coin and when
you reveal the part you scratch off you
found out if you win
this is one mode of government created
gambling in most countries the ticket
will cost five dollars
and maybe the maximum you can win is
five thousand dollars
right it's this particular type of
gambling they they they don't give you a
million dollars doesn't go that high
for different reasons i think including
the fear of fraud or what have you
they're different types of lotteries in
different countries everyone knows it's
stupid
everyone knows it's poss but they feel
like look it's only five dollars
all of us pay five dollars and somebody
somewhere
will win fifty thousand dollars and it
won't it probably won't even change
their lives that much
it'll just be a nice funny happy thing
for somebody
somewhere right the problem is
there are real world consequences to the
corruption of our education system
this way all right we've been through a
series of
unbelievably tumultuous political
changes
last 20 years let's say or yeah this is
now
this is now 2021. okay i can remember
september 11th 2001. okay
after september 11th 2001 i remember so
i was at a university
i studied the politics of the muslim
world at university not the only thing i
studied
but this is one of the topics i i
studied right and we had one professor
teaching that topic and he he and i were
friends
uh you can guess why you can guess why
he and i were friends we really we
talked about our personal lives
he was getting divorced at that time he
talked to his personal life and all this
stuff you know we we
we really were not just professor and
student and he was the first professor
who told me to read max sterner
philosophy of max turner which is now
discussed in my channel so
influence each other's lives and their
advice all right and the whole
university's attitude before
september 11 2001 was that politics in
the muslim world was something marginal
that didn't matter he had to fight to
get a half credit course added to this
getting
ah nobody cares and this is just think
geographically what a huge part of the
world this is no no
they were telling them to just teach
just teach a generalized course on
political philosophy
uh you know telling them to teach kind
of fluff nonsense and not to insist on
doing this kind of hard
research on what what's happening what
was unfolding at that time
in iraq iran saudi arabia
you know it's a huge part of the world
you know it goes on
indonesia okay september 11 2001
happens and the senior management of the
university
and of the department come to him and
say we made a mistake we want to offer
you a contract we want to
we want to give you a for all of a
sudden this this matters
and you know he told them they can stuff
it down their hat
and he suddenly had job offers from new
york and washington dc
yeah all of a sudden this area of
expertise was in wasn't was in high
demand
right that was one moment where we had
to stop and ask
where now are your great scholars where
now
are your great specialists of the
politics and languages and history
of the middle east however you want to
term it
of the arabic speaking world of the
muslim world right each of these terms
has different borders
on the map they are not synonymous right
where now in 2021 even today
where now are your great scholars of
afghanistan where now
are your great scholars of the politics
of china
kind of a small country of india of
pakistan
of the political relationships between
these countries how many people do you
have
who can even read and respond to what's
happening in the newspapers
of nepal of uzbekistan
there is a real social need for
competence
and for profound levels of linguistic
and political
ability right in each one of these
languages in a country
like the united states canada or england
and then
when you need it all of a sudden you
turn to academia you say oh well where
okay so who can we recruit even if
you're trying to recruit people into the
cia
even if you're trying to recruit people
into the army and they do that they try
to
hire people all of a sudden we need
expertise and oh
oh it turns out the university isn't
isn't producing that at all and you can
sit there i've done you can sit there
with a stack
of the master's degree thesis uh that
these people have produced
i've just happened to be m a thesis i
remember sitting with a stack of these
on paper
and leafing oh oh we have a we have an
m.a
thesis here about you know feminism
and how you know karl marx was right
about everything like
oh you start flipping through and seeing
the research people are actually doing
what it is that justifies having an m.a
or a phd
in any of these fields and trust me
what's going
on even in a field like buddhist studies
like even something that's as specific
and technomatic as that
it is just that bad
i think what begins with the lottery
mentality
of accepting that an opportunity for
someone
somewhere is good enough for all of us
everywhere that we can all contribute
our tax dollars
we can all buy the lottery tickets so
that someone somewhere
you know can have this opportunity it
results in a
whole society based on the blind
leading the blind you have an education
system that recruits
and rewards incompetence that creates
ideological silos of self-serving people
who only want to work with others who
share their fundamental
assumptions in life who will reinforce
their sense of their own ego
right re reaffirm their sense of
security in their unchallenged
confidence
when in reality you know the decades
have gone past
and even in easily verifiable things
like can you actually read this language
can you actually do this work the
professors
lack the confidence and they produce one
generation of students after another
who lack this kind of competence also
is there a solution to be found
just in this simple storied
concept of justice
i think that in western democracies
it's only when people perceive
an injustice that things start to change